# release-script

Release tool for npm and bower packages.


---
##### Human factor

**Because of human nature to make mistakes, by default this script runs in `dry mode`.
It prevents `danger` steps (`git push`, `npm publish` etc) from accidental running.**

**For actual running your command please add `--run` option.**

*If you don't want this behavior you can add `"defaultDryRun": "false"` into your `package.json`.*
```json
"release-script": {
  "defaultDryRun": "false"
}
```
*Then you can use `--dry-run` option for checks.*

---

#### Description

With this tool there is no need to keep (transpiled) `lib`, `build`
or `distr` files in the git repo.

Because `Bower` keeps its files in the github repo,
this tools helps to deal with that too.

Just create new additional github repo for `Bower` version of your project.
This repo will contain only commits generated by this tool.

Say the name of your project is
`original-project-name`
then name the `bower` github repo as
`original-project-name-bower`.

Add `'release-script'.bowerRepo` into your `package.json`:
```json
"release-script": {
  "bowerRepo": "git@github.com:<author>/original-project-name-bower.git"
}
```

Then add additional step into your building process,
which will create `bower` package files in the `amd` folder,
(basically it is just a process of copying the `lib` files, README and LICENSE)
and that's all.

Now `release-script` will do all those steps (described next),
including `bower` publishing, for you - automatically.


_Initial idea is got from `React-Bootstrap` release tools `./tools/release`,
that have been written by [Matt Smith @mtscout6](https://github.com/mtscout6)_

#### Documents pages publishing

If your project compiles static documentation pages (as e.g. `React-Boostrap` does)
and needs to publish them to standalone repo / hosting (via `git push`),
you can do it the same way the `bower` package releasing done.

Just create additional github repo for your static documents site.

E.g. [react-bootstrap.github.io.git](https://github.com/react-bootstrap/react-bootstrap.github.io)

Add it as `'release-script'.docsRepo` into your `package.json`:
```json
"release-script": {
  "docsRepo": "git@github.com:<author>/original-project-name-github.io.git"
}
```
Default folders for documents are:
- `"docsRoot": "docs-built"` folder where the documents files will be built (by your custom building scripts)
- `"tmpDocsRepo": "tmp-docs-repo"` temporary folder.

It is advised to add them both into `.gitignore`.

You can customize them as you need:
```json
"release-script": {
  "docsRepo": "git@github.com:<author>/original-project-name-github.io.git"
  "docsRoot": "docs-built",
  "tmpDocsRepo": "tmp-docs-repo"
}
```

If you need to publish only documents (say with some minor fixes),
this is as simple as:
```
> release --only-docs --run
```
In this case the `package.json` version will be bumped with `--preid docs` as `0.10.0` => `0.10.0-docs.0`.

If `npm run docs-build` script is present, then it will be used instead of `npm run build` script.

#### Pre-release versions publishing

Say you need to publish pre-release `v0.25.100-pre.0` version
with the `canary` npm tag name (instead of default one `latest`).

You can do it by this way:
```
> release 0.25.100 --preid pre --tag canary --run
or
> npm run release 0.25.100 -- --preid pre --tag canary --run
```

If your `preid` tag and npm tag name are the same, then you can just:
```
> release 0.25.100 --preid beta --run
```
It will produce `v0.25.100-beta.0` and `npm publish --tag beta`.

`changelog` generated output will go into `CHANGELOG-alpha.md` for pre-releases,
and with the next release this file will be removed.

#### Alternative npm package root folder

Say you want to publish to `npmjs` only the content of your `lib` folder.
Then you can do it as simple as adding this option to your `package.json`
```json
"release-script": {
  "altPkgRootFolder": "lib"
}
```
and that's all.

#### The special case. `build` step in `tests` step.

If you run building scripts within your `npm run test` step, e.g.
```json
"scripts": {
  "test": "npm run lint && npm run build && npm run tests-set",
}
```
then you can disable superfluous `npm run build` step running
by setting `'release-script'.skipBuildStep` option:
```json
"release-script": {
  "skipBuildStep": "true"
}
```

#### Options

All options for this package are kept under `'release-script'` node in your project's `package.json`

- `bowerRepo` - the full url to github project for the bower pkg files
- `bowerRoot` - the folder name where your `npm run build` command will put/transpile files for bower pkg
  - `default` value: `'amd'`
- `tmpBowerRepo` - the folder name for temporary files for bower pkg.
  - `default` value: `'tmp-bower-repo'`
- `altPkgRootFolder` - the folder name for alternative npm package root folder

It is advised to add `bowerRoot` and `tmpBowerRepo` folders to your `.gitignore` file.

All options are optional.

E.g.:
```json
"release-script": {
  "bowerRepo": "git@github.com:<org-author-name>/<name-of-project>-bower.git",
  "bowerRoot": "amd",
  "tmpBowerRepo": "tmp-bower-repo",
  "altPkgRootFolder": "lib"
}
```

#### GitHub releases

If you want this script to publish github releases,
you can generate token https://github.com/settings/tokens for it
and set `env.GITHUB_TOKEN` to it like this:
```sh
> GITHUB_TOKEN="xxxxxxxxxxxx" && release-script patch
```
or through your shell scripts
```sh
export GITHUB_TOKEN="xxxxxxxxxxxx"
```
You can set a custom message for release via `--notes` CLI option:
```
> release patch --notes "This is small fix" --run
```


#### This script does following steps:

- ensures that git repo has no pending changes
- ensures that git repo last version is fetched
- checks linting and tests by running `npm run test` command
- does version bump, with `preid` if it is requested
- builds all by running `npm run build` command
  - If there is no `build` script, then `release-script` just skips the `build` step.
- if one of `[rf|mt]-changelog` is used in 'devDependencies', then changelog is generated
- adds and commits changed `package.json` (and `CHANGELOG.md`, if used) files to git repo
- adds git tag with new version (and changelog message, if used)
- pushes changes to github repo
- if github token is present, publishes release to GitHub, named as `<repo> vx.x.x`
- if `--preid` tag set, then `npm publish --tag` command for npm publishing is used
  - through `--tag` one can set `npm tag name` for the pre-release version (e.g. `alpha` or `canary`)
  - othewise `--preid` value will be used
- if `altPkgRootFolder` doesn't set it will just `npm publish [--tag]` as usual
  - otherwise if `altPkgRootFolder` set then this script
    - will `npm publish [--tag]` from the `altPkgRootFolder` folder
    - with the custom version of `package.json` with removed `scripts` and `devDependencies`
    - also it will remove the `altPkgRootFolder` part from the `main` file path
- if `bowerRepo` field is present in the `package.json`, then it releases bower package:
  - clones bower repo to local `tmpBowerRepo` temp folder. `git clone bowerRepo tmpBowerRepo`
  - then it cleans up all but `.git` files in the `tmpBowerRepo`
  - then copies all files from `bowerRoot` to `tmpBowerRepo`
    - (that has to be generated with `npm run build`)
  - then by `git add -A .` adds all bower distr files to the temporary git repo
  - commits, tags and pushes the same as for the `npm` package.
  - then deletes the `tmpBowerRepo` folder
- id `docsRepo` field is present in the `package.json`, then it pushes builded documents to their repo.
  It is done the same way as `bower` repo.

If command line `--only-docs` option is set, then `github`, `npm` and `bower` publishing steps will be skipped.

## Installation

```sh
> npm install -D release-script
```

If you need `bower` releases too, then add `'release-script'.bowerRepo` into your `package.json` like this:
```json
"release-script": {
  "bowerRepo": "git@github.com:<org-author-name>/<name-of-project>-bower.git"
}
```

Then you can release like that:
```sh
> release patch --run
> release minor --preid alpha --run
```

If you don't have smth like that in your shell:
```sh
# npm
export PATH="./node_modules/.bin:$PATH"
```
then you have to type the commands like this:
```sh
> ./node_modules/.bin/release minor --preid alpha --run
```

Or you just can install `release-script` globally.

You also can add some helpful `script` commands to your `package.json`,
and because `npm` adds `node_modules/.bin` into `PATH` for running scripts automatically,
you can add them just like that:
```json
"scripts": {
    ...
    "patch": "release patch --run",
    "minor": "release minor --run",
    "major": "release major --run",
    "release-dry-run": "release patch"
```

Also you can add it like this:
```json
"scripts": {
    ...
    "release": "release",
```
And then you can run it like that:
```
> npm run release minor -- --preid alpha --run
> npm run release patch -- --notes "This is small fix --run"
> npm run release major // for dry run
etc
```
_Notice: you have to add additional `--` before any `--option`. That way additional options will get straight to `release-script`._


## License
`release-script` is licensed under the [MIT License](https://github.com/alexkval/release-script/blob/master/LICENSE).
